>> Brian Holt: We are gonna
move on to programming now.
So actually writing JavaScript.
So I would say for the next,
maybe hour or two, if you already
know how to program on another language,
this is gonna be a lot of review for you.
Because we're gonna go over very, very
base level proficiencies with programming,
like if statements and for loops and
variables and things like that.
But if you do not know how to program at
all, this is exactly tailored to you.
So,
>> Brian Holt: It's gonna be fun.
So also, this is tough section to teach
because students very, very widely here.
If you're coming from another language,
this tends to be a little bit of review.
If you're brand new then this is gonna
be a whole lot to take in all at once.
But, I made the comparison here,
if you know Spanish already,
if you go to learn Italian you already
have like 50 to 60% of the grammar,
you understand all of that.
It's kinda the same thing here
if you're coming from Go,
you're going to learn some new things, but
a lot of it's gonna be some review for
you.
>> Brian Holt: So, just stick with me,
skim, that kind of stuff.
>> Brian Holt: So,
I'm going to wax philosophical for
a moment.
What is code?
Who am I?
Why am I here?
No, I'm just kidding.
We're just gonna ask you what is code?
What is code?
It might surprise you, but code is
actually meant more for humans than it is
for computers, and a lot of people
are like, well why am I writing code then?
If code was just for computers,
we'd all be writing assembly directly.
So that's why we end up writing code,
because code is something that we as
humans can read and understand and update
and maintain and these kinda things.
And a very junior level
mistake to make is to write code that
you never intend on maintaining.
Because it's really easy to
write code the first time, and
it's really difficult
to come back to code.
So you actually don't wanna optimize for
writing code, you wanna optimize for
maintaining code.
So everything that you can do to make your
code more readable, more understandable,
less clever, more slick,
just more plain, right?
So that you can go back an read it, and
say okay, this is exactly what this does.
So you should write more code rather than
less code if it makes it more readable.
And a lot of people are like, I wanna
make the most clever, terse, crazy stuff.
They basically wanna write Haskell,
that would be a funny joke if any
of you knew functional programming,
people that are Haskell are jerks.
[LAUGH] That's also a joke,
I quit like Haskell,
but for me personally it's hard to read or
it can be.
So that's my plea to you, is try and
write code that's very readable.
Be thinking about if I had to
come back five years later and
try and read this code and
understand what it does, how would I do?
You should be asking that to
yourself that constantly.
So yeah, be deliberate, be explicit,
try not to be clever and
just remember that code is communication.
>> Brian Holt: So,
let's frame how code works on.
>> Brian Holt: So when you write code,
the code is basically parsed in to pieces
that's broken down in to something that
a computer can understand.
>> Brian Holt: JavaScript is what we've
call single threaded, that means that only
one thing is ever happening at a time.
So if you're coming from
something like Java or Go or
something else that they have
these features called concurrency.
That they can do multiple things at once,
JavaScript has no way
of doing concurrency.
It has doing things out of order which is
different from doing things concurrently.
So, that's good for you because it's a lot
easier to understand single threaded code,
it's really easy to understand
the order that things happen in.
>> Brian Holt: In general,
going down to this code here,
let's make this a tiny bit bigger.
This is your first bit of JavaScript
right here that we're gonna talk about.
>> Brian Holt: Generally,
it reads how you would expect it,
that it does line one, then line two,
then line three, then line four, right?
It executes in order, so
it's gonna run this line.
It's going to complete, then it's gonna
do line two, and then line three, and
then line four.
So let's talk about this particular
piece of code right here.
We're saying const monthlyRent equals 500.
Now even if you don't know coding before,
I think this should
make some sense to you.
That monthly rent is a variable that
is being assigned the value of 500.
So if I come here on the next line and
say console.log(monthlyRent),
you might expect that I'm gonna get 500.
monthlyRent is basically now
a symbol that represents 500.
Now, the const here means that
this is an unchanging value,
that I can't come in here on the next
line and say, monthlyRent = 600.
It's gonna say, hey, you already assigned
monthly rents to be something else,
you can't do that.
>> Brian Holt: That's what const means,
we'll get into let later.
But let allows you to change that,
the const does allow changer.
Anytime you see console.log here,
that's basically,
gonna say, I'm gonna write down here
in the result, that's all that means.
So anything that gets put
inside the parenthesis here is
instead of console log is gonna
get written down here, okay?
In JavaScript, you can have as many
empty lines as you want, so I could put
five here and JavaScript is happy to just
skip as many empty lines as it wants.
So in other words, use empty lines as
much as you need to separate things
logically so that it's easy to skip around
and see what's happening in your code.
It's a useful device for
breaking things up,
just like writing a paragraph in an essay.
Okay, so now we yearlyRent here, and
I'm saying const yearlyRent is being
assigned monthlyRent times, that's what
this asterisk means, it means multiplied.
Because we don't write x,
that doesn't make any sense.
We use the star to represent
multiplication, times 12,
right, 12 months in a year.
So 12 times the monthly rent is
going to give you the yearly rent.
And then I assign that to this and
then I log that out and
I get 6,000.
>> Brian Holt: Any questions about that?
Is your first JavaScript program.
>> Brian Holt: Then
you see down here undefined.
So just the way that this
particular little thing works,
it's not that it's important for
you to know.
If I just put 500 here,
whatever the last thing returns,
we'll talk about returns later.
But right now, nothing is being returned.
So it says, hey,
you didn't return anything, so
your return is undefined.
>> Brian Holt: So or
you could just put
literally yearly rent here,
yearlyRent, and
it would return 6,000 here as well.
So,
>> Brian Holt: Anyway,
>> Brian Holt: That's worth talking about.
There can't be any spaces
in variable names.
So, we need some way of doing
multiple words together.
And if you put monthly rent like this,
it's kind of hard to read.
All lower case things shoved together,
particularly when it starts
getting really long.
So we need some way of doing,
separating of words.
Now technically you could do underscore
here, this is a valid JavaScript name and
this is more like how Python looks for
example.
It's not how we do it in JavaScript.
JavaScript, just because there's
not really a good reason, but
in JavaScript we have chosen to
do what's called camel casing.
So when you have words you're gonna do
camel casing to make it just more readable
for you.
>> Brian Holt: It's
called camel casing cuz it
looks like a hump, right?
It's like in the middle of the word.
>> Brian Holt: There's
no reason your JavaScript
code would not execute.
But as soon as I see someone do this,
in an interview or something like that,
I'm like this person doesn't
write a lot of JavaScript,
because everything is done
camel casing in JavaScript
>> Brian Holt: Notice the semicolons.
Remember in CSS you have to put the
semicolon at the end of every statement,
the same is true of JavaScript.
Technically, you can omit them,
>> Brian Holt: And it does still work.
JavaScript has what's called ASI,
automatic semicolon insertion.
So it does technically let you do that,
and there are people that choose to write
their JavaScript that way.
>> Brian Holt: I don't care,
I really don't.
If I never have that conversation
with someone ever again,
I'm perfectly happy about that.
I just hate arguing about stupid stuff,
and
this definitely qualifies
under stupid stuff.
So, do whatever you want,
just don't tell me about what you're
doing.
>> Brian Holt: In any case,
if you don't put the semicolons there,
the computer will put them there for
you when it goes to execute them.
>> Brian Holt: Okay.,
variables can be called almost anything,
you can't use what are called keywords.
So for example, I can't say, const const
= 5, because const is a keyword, right?
It means something in JavaScript.
So you cannot use const, you can't
use function, you can't use default,
there's a bunch of things
that you can't use.
And believe me it will tell
you what you can't use.
So it's gonna say, hey you're missing
a variable name or if I try and do it like
function, it's gonna be all weird and say,
it's hey, you're missing a variable name.
it's just not gonna understand what you're
trying to do, cuz it thinks you're trying
to declare a function there.
>> Brian Holt: But other than that,
if you're missing all the keywords,
you can call it whatever you want.
What else?
>> Brian Holt: Just
to show you, so,
these are my developer tools.
When we're doing console.log here and
its logging on this little thing on the
page for you, which is just a convenience.
If you actually go into your console here,
you'll see that it is actually logging out
here as well.
>> Brian Holt: I think,
maybe it's not, it might be blocking it.
Anyway normally,
let's just trash all that.
There's a bunch of stuff coming
from the plugin that I'm using so
you can ignore that,
just gonna make this bigger, I can, cool.
Normally, you can actually just write
directly here to your console, and
say like console.log,
>> Brian Holt: 5+5 or
something like that
>> Brian Holt: Look,
it's actually putting it out there,
that's really funny.
So don't do it on this page,
let's just open a new tab and do that,
so console.log(5).
There you go, so
it's logging it right there.
So you can actually just use this kind
of as what we'd call a REPL, R-E-P-L.
Read, evaluate, print, I don't know,
now I'm making this stuff up.
It stands for something that I
don't care what it stands for, but
you can just type commands in,
mess around, test things out.
I can say, x = 5, 5 * 25,
it will just print that stuff out so
you can actually just program directly
in here and mess around with stuff,
I do it all the time.
>> Brian Holt: And
anytime you would normally
write console.log,
instead of your JavaScript file,
this is where it gets written out, right?
So questions about that?
>> Brian Holt: Where am I?
I'm in here.
>> Brian Holt: This side happens to be
a little screwed up because we overrode
the console.log to write to this
thing right here.
>> Brian Holt: Okay.
>> Brian Holt: I've put a link here if
you're having trouble finding
in developer tools right there,
that'll show you how to do it in
multiple different browsers as well.
So there's a link there if you need help.
>> Brian Holt: Okay,
we're gonna do it now inside of VS code,
so you can see what that looks like, so
you can figure out kind of how you
connect those things together.
So just copy this bit of HTML right here,
we already learnt HTML,
we're not gonna spend too time on that.
Here, I'm just gonna close this project,
I'm gonna say new folder on my desktop,
this I'm gonna call it experiment,
you can call it whatever you want.
And then I'm going to open this folder,
you can drag and
drop them onto Visual Studio code and
Visual Studio code will open that folder
inside of Visual Studio code.
>> Brian Holt: You can
also just do Cmd + Open here as well and
just find experiments and
click on that as well, that would be fine.
>> Brian Holt: So
in here I'm gonna put a new file,
so I did Cmd+N,
Cmd+S, so New File and then Save.
Or you can also do New File and then you
can do save from here as well, from File.
That works as well, and that should
work both in Windows and in Mac,
as well as probably in Linux, I assume.
>> Brian Holt: Okay,
so, new file index.html,
paste all that stuff.
So we're going to bring
in an experiments.js,
so we're going to make another new file.
And we're gonna save that
as well in experiments.js.
So now we have a JavaScript file
that we're gonna be working
with.
>> Brian Holt: You can ignore my
ESLint stuff, no one cares.
[LAUGH] So this script tag is going
to load that experiments file that
we just put there.
>> Brian Holt: And now I'm gonna copy and
paste that code that we were just
playing with right there and save that.
So now this is my experiments.js file,
and now I'm gonna open this in
my browser just like I had done before
>> Brian Holt: On my desktop,
experiments > index.html.
You'll get a blank page, no,
it says JavaScript Experiments.
But now if I look in my console, you'll
see that 6,000 is being logged out here
inside of my console.
>> Brian Holt: Yeah
this is yelling at me because I didn't
put stuff in my head but whatever,
screw you Firefox I don't care.
>> Brian Holt: Any question about this?
Is it working for most people?
So I just wanted you to establish,
how do I start a new project if I'm
gonna write a JavaScript project?
So you need an index file to load your
JavaScript file, and then you need to
connect it using this source tag right
here, so source equals eperiments.js.
Remember the dot slash means
in the same directory,
it goes over to this directory file.
And then it's going to download
this file separately and
then immediately run the code, right?
So it's just gonna start
running this by itself.
You don't have to do anything,
you just say,
as long as it downloads it,
it's just gonna run it.
That's how it works.